README.md, before:

# tar-pipe

`tar-pipe` optimized transfer of file system entries over TCP socket.

## Description

tar-pipe is a very fast way to copy one or more file system entries
from source to destination over a network socket. While `rsync` is the
preferred choice for this particular task when synchronizing files,
when copying files for first time, `tar-pipe` is much faster.

`tar-pipe` can be configured to compress the data using gzip
compression.

### Performance and Reliability

`rsync` is an amazing and fast program. I recommend anyone curious to
study its source code and learn how it works. However, for making a
bulk filesystem copy across a network, some of the features of `rsync`
make it more slow than merely streaming the file system object data
and metadata across the network.

I thouroughly tested `tar-pipe` multiple times with nearly 900 GiB of
data, comparing the transfer time and the resultant file system
output. To test the speed, I simply invoked each command using the
`time` shell builtin command to measure the wall clock time to
transfer the ~900 GiB file system hierarchy.

On the low-end embedded devices I tested on, `tar-pipe` repeatedly
performed the transfer in ~12 minutes, and `rsync` repeatedly
performed the same transfer to a newly initialized directory in ~45
minutes.

To test the correctness of `tar-pipe`, after I ran it to transfer the
~900 GiB file system hierarchy, I ran `rsync` in verbose mode to
display any changes needed to make the destination a duplicate of the
source. In every test, the only differences were the file system
modification times of the destination directories. These differences
were due to the algorithm that `tar-pipe` uses that make it much
faster than `rsync` for the bulk-transfer. This limitation has since
been eliminated without significantly impacting the performance of
this program.

## Usage

Always start `tar-pipe` on the destination machine first. The receive
subcommand expects an optional IP address and a mandatory port number
to bind to. The port number must always be proceeded by the colon
character. The optional IP address would be used when `tar-pipe` ought
to bind only to a particular interface, if desired.

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe receive :6969

After the recipient is waiting, send the files from the source.

    [you@source.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe send destination.example.com:6969 dir1 dir2 ...

After `tar-pipe` finishes, `~/dir1` and `~/dir2` from
`source.example.com` will be replicated to `~/dir1` and `~/dir2` on
`destination.example.com`.

### Compression

By default `tar-pipe` sends the raw tar stream without compression. To
sacrifice some CPU overhead to acheive better network throughput,
`tar-pipe` will compress the tar stream using gzip when the `-z,
--gzip` command line flags are provided.

*NOTE:* Both the sender and receiver must be invoked with the
compression flag, or neither must be invoked with the compression
flag.

On the destination host:

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -z receive :6969

On the source host:

    [you@source.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -z send destination.example.com:6969 dir1 dir2 ...

### Encryption

By default `tar-pipe` sends the raw tar stream in the clear, that is
to say, without encrpytion. To sacrifice some CPU overhead to ensure
your bytes remain private, `tar-pipe` will encrypt the tar stream
using TLS when the `-s, --secure` command line flags are
provided. Note the same passphrase must be used on both the sending
and receiving end of the connection.

On the destination host:

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -s receive :6969

On the source host:

    [you@source.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -s send destination.example.com:6969 dir1 dir2 ...

### Verbose Output

By default `tar-pipe` does not display any output on the source or
destination hosts unless any errors are encountered, in which case
errors are printed to standard error. When `tar-pipe` is invoked with
the `-v, --verbose` command line flag, it prints connection
information and compression information to standard output. The
verbose flag on the source and destination are independent of each
other. In other words you may have verbose on neither of the source or
the destination, either of them, or both of them.

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -v receive :6969

## Limitations

Because each hard link to a file is identical to each other hard link
to the same file, the algorithm to determine whether a particular file
system entry is a unique file or merely a hard link to another file in
the same hierarchy is an O(n^2) problem that is not implemented
here. Furthermore, even if two unique files have the same data does
not mean the user wants a hard link created on the destination. As a
result hard links on the source are replicated on the destination as
merely another file that happens to have identical contents.

The following file system objects are not supported:

1. Block and Character devices (TODO)
1. Extracting a FIFO (named pipe) is not supported on Windows™ (OS
   limitation), but is supported on UNIX™ like systems.
1. UNIX™ domain sockets (tar archive format limitation)

Commit message:

README provides correct encryption algorithm used by program

README.md, after:

# tar-pipe

`tar-pipe` optimized transfer of file system entries over TCP socket.

## Description

tar-pipe is a very fast way to copy one or more file system entries
from source to destination over a network socket. While `rsync` is the
preferred choice for this particular task when synchronizing files,
when copying files for first time, `tar-pipe` is much faster.

`tar-pipe` can be configured to compress the data using gzip and or
encrypt the data using AES-GCM encryption algorithm.

### Performance and Reliability

`rsync` is an amazing and fast program. I recommend anyone curious to
study its source code and learn how it works. However, for making a
bulk filesystem copy across a network, some of the features of `rsync`
make it more slow than merely streaming the file system object data
and metadata across the network.

I thouroughly tested `tar-pipe` multiple times with nearly 900 GiB of
data, comparing the transfer time and the resultant file system
output. To test the speed, I simply invoked each command using the
`time` shell builtin command to measure the wall clock time to
transfer the ~900 GiB file system hierarchy.

On the low-end embedded devices I tested on, `tar-pipe` repeatedly
performed the transfer in ~12 minutes, and `rsync` repeatedly
performed the same transfer to a newly initialized directory in ~45
minutes.

To test the correctness of `tar-pipe`, after I ran it to transfer the
~900 GiB file system hierarchy, I ran `rsync` in verbose mode to
display any changes needed to make the destination a duplicate of the
source. In every test, the only differences were the file system
modification times of the destination directories. These differences
were due to the algorithm that `tar-pipe` uses that make it much
faster than `rsync` for the bulk-transfer. This limitation has since
been eliminated without significantly impacting the performance of
this program.

## Usage

Always start `tar-pipe` on the destination machine first. The receive
subcommand expects an optional IP address and a mandatory port number
to bind to. The port number must always be proceeded by the colon
character. The optional IP address would be used when `tar-pipe` ought
to bind only to a particular interface, if desired.

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe receive :6969

After the recipient is waiting, send the files from the source.

    [you@source.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe send destination.example.com:6969 dir1 dir2 ...

After `tar-pipe` finishes, `~/dir1` and `~/dir2` from
`source.example.com` will be replicated to `~/dir1` and `~/dir2` on
`destination.example.com`.

### Compression

By default `tar-pipe` sends the raw tar stream without compression. To
sacrifice some CPU overhead to acheive better network throughput,
`tar-pipe` will compress the tar stream using gzip when the `-z,
--gzip` command line flags are provided.

*NOTE:* Both the sender and receiver must be invoked with the
compression flag, or neither must be invoked with the compression
flag.

On the destination host:

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -z receive :6969

On the source host:

    [you@source.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -z send destination.example.com:6969 dir1 dir2 ...

### Encryption

By default `tar-pipe` sends the raw tar stream in the clear, that is
to say, without encrpytion. To sacrifice some CPU overhead to ensure
your bytes remain private, `tar-pipe` will encrypt the tar stream
using AES-GCM when the `-s, --secure` command line flag is
provided. Note the same passphrase must be used on both the sending
and receiving end of the connection. The `-s, --secure` command line
flag accepts no options. When provided, `tar-pipe` will prompt you for
the passphrase to use for the data stream.

On the destination host:

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -s receive :6969

On the source host:

    [you@source.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -s send destination.example.com:6969 dir1 dir2 ...

### Verbose Output

By default `tar-pipe` does not display any output on the source or
destination hosts unless any errors are encountered, in which case
errors are printed to standard error. When `tar-pipe` is invoked with
the `-v, --verbose` command line flag, it prints connection
information and compression information to standard output. The
verbose flag on the source and destination are independent of each
other. In other words you may have verbose on neither of the source or
the destination, either of them, or both of them.

    [you@destination.example.com ~]$ tar-pipe -v receive :6969

## Limitations

Because each hard link to a file is identical to each other hard link
to the same file, the algorithm to determine whether a particular file
system entry is a unique file or merely a hard link to another file in
the same hierarchy is an O(n^2) problem that is not implemented
here. Furthermore, even if two unique files have the same data does
not mean the user wants a hard link created on the destination. As a
result hard links on the source are replicated on the destination as
merely another file that happens to have identical contents.

The following file system objects are not supported:

1. Block and Character devices (TODO)
1. Extracting a FIFO (named pipe) is not supported on Windows™ (OS
   limitation), but is supported on UNIX™ like systems.
1. UNIX™ domain sockets (tar archive format limitation)
